We've all heard of the profiteering involved in war.
In short, war is good business for those in the power elite.
The war in Irag is no exception.
Film producer, Robert Greenwald has pulled together
a portrait of the degree to which this war
has been conducted to profit those
closest to those in power and the profits are staggering.
Try the $45 per six-pack of coke
the government pays the services contractor
or the $100 to do a load of the soldiers skivvies
and that's only small potatoes compared to the rest
of what's detailed in the film "Iraq for Sale".
(rhythmic music)
What prompted you to tell this story?
A friend of mine suggested that war profiteering
was one of the great uncovered stories and he felt
that if we could do the movie and do it reasonably quickly,
come the fall, when we're in the election campaign,
we could use the film to force a
debate about war profiteering.
This was in January.
It's now September and we were able to get it done
on an insane schedule and hopefully, now,
it's doing what it needs to do, which is people
are taking it, they're screening it, they're organizing it,
and they're using it to ask questions about
what's going on with war profiteering,
who's protecting me, and who's not protecting me.
If we can get into a little bit,
how did this story, what revealed itself to you in the
process of researching this subject,
and get into the meat and bones of it little bit.
As we started the research, I was sure that
there would be some troubling facts and figures.
What I didn't really focus on is that profiteering
is not a victimless crime, it's not a white-collar crime,
which kind of just goes out into the environment
and you don't know how it's affecting anybody.
People's lives are being lost and in the movie,
we have truck drivers whose best friends
were killed in Iraq because Halliburton
was cutting corners to make a bigger profit.
The head of Halliburton has made over $100,000,000
in his stock since the war began.
We have mothers whose sons were killed at Fallujah
because Blackwater was trying to save money
and doing things they shouldn't have done,
and we have interrogators at Abu Ghraib
talking about the fact that they were hired by CACI,
a for-profit company, and sent
into Abu Ghraib to make a profit.
The head of CACI made $20,000,000.
Those are things I had no idea about
and I was troubled and shocked and it was painful
because people's lives are being lost.
We're not just talking about mercenaries.
I think, even when the war first began, there were stories
about people who went over in a more mercenary fashion,
you know, bold men to make a profit,
knowing what they were getting into.
This is not exactly what we're talking about here, is it?
No, what we're focused on in the movie
is the corporations, the boards of directors,
the heads of the corporations, who are leading the charge
to profit from the war at the very same time
that men and women, Americans, Iraqis, children
are being killed and hospitals are not being built,
these companies are taking hundreds of millions
and literally billions of dollars out of Iraq
and into their private coffers.
That's wrong and there's been no discussion of it.
Right, very little discussion
and can you give us an example of a couple
of different people that were induced into this
civilian position in this war-zone?
Specifics, a couple specifics?
There's a truck driver in the movie.
A guy I just love, I haven't met him,
it's just been on the phone, named Shane,
and he talks about going over there to help his family,
to do the right thing, to rebuild Iraq, to help the troops,
goes to work for Halliburton, truck driver,
just driving a truck in some city in the United States.
He thinks he's part of the good effort.
Yeah, and he gets over there and he discovers that,
and I didn't believe this when I first heard it,
Halliburton's charging you and everybody watching this
cause it's out tax dollars, $45 for a six-pack of Coke.
You are kidding...
I've heard of these exorbitant prices, $45 for a six-pack?
Right, and we heard that over and over and over again
and then, a soldier and several other Halliburton
truck drivers talk about setting
their laundry out, t-shirts, underwear, $100.
Now, all of that comes out of your pocket because these
contracts are what's called cost-plus contracts, it means--
What's that mean cost-plus--
Well, that's what I'm--
(laughs)
What it means is that whatever the cost is
Halliburton gets that money, plus a built-in profit
based on the size of the contract, which means
the more you spend, the more profit you make
so there's absolutely no inducement or incentive
or reason for them to spend less.
In fact, there's reason to spend more.
So how would you cost-plus
a six-pack of Coke up to $45?
Halliburton is run by a former Enron accountant so a
(Regina laughing)
guy from Arthur Andersen, which helps explain some of that.
It's pretty staggering.
It is staggering, but there has to be
a solid and tempting inducement for the people
that do volunteer or are hired
by the corporations to go over there.
What's the story they're told,
while they're still here, before they go to Iraq?
First of all, they're told they'll
be safe or they have been told.
One of the reasons I hope the people will screen the film
all over is we have to break that mythology down.
People have to know how dangerous it is
and second of all, we are at a time in the United States
where it's tragic, but a truck driver has to go to Iraq
to make a living to pay for his healthcare or
to put his children through school.
That's a tragedy of the worst kind and again,
like in the Walmart movie, we're looking at a system.
We're not looking at individual crooks.
We're looking at a system of profit,
large corporations that give money to politicians
that hire former high-level military and politicians,
and as a result, are getting significant contracts
and making millions and ultimately billions of dollars.
So how much are they offering
to these people to do a truck driving job?
I assume it's for a Tour of Duty,
for a few months or a set period of time.
It's variable.
It depends on what trucks you're in,
what part of the country it is,
but the things that the soldiers told me over and over again
is that they would be working right next to somebody,
who would be doing exactly the same job as the soldier,
and that person would be getting
three and four times what the soldier made,
and again, your tax dollars are paying for that.
So it's a significant amount
of money to be a truck driver.
Oh yeah, yes.
They're tempted into going over for all the
obvious reasons to take care of their families and so forth.
They get there, and they're promised that this
is a civilian job, you will not be in any particular danger.
Give us a couple of examples where that was not the case.
We have a story in the film called "The Friday Massacre",
where these truck drivers talk about the fact,
there were two of them who survived, and actually,
there were four of them who survived,
two of them are in the movie and they tell the story
of getting up and driving that day down a road
that had been closed, that had been marked dangerous,
but Halliburton pushed it because
they get paid by the number of trips,
by they way, they don't have to deliver anything.
They just have to take trips so we even had truck drivers
tell us about driving, virtually, empty trucks across Iraq
because the billing procedure awards Halliburton for that.
That's criminal.
Yeah, and in this particular case, "Friday Massacre",
we have the two women whose husbands were killed
in that massacre because Halliburton did not abide
by any kind of safety rules or regulations
and there was no protection or
very little protection and they were driven
as corporations are to maximize dollars.
We all have had the experience.
We all know what large corporations do,
whether it's cutting a job, or eliminating
a function, or having less expensive goods,
corporations are driven to maximize profit.
When you do that in the war, people are gonna die,
and people are dying as a result of that.
And they can get away with it, I'm assuming,
because outside of films like this,
they're really out of harms way.
They're out of the view of the camera
because everything is so heavily censored in terms of
what comes out on the evening news, for example.
How was this working within the system?
How did you get the videos and also,
I assume a lot of the interviews you
must have gotten after they had returned.
How did this work in gathering the information
when it is so heavily censored?
It was a challenge finding the people,
but people who'd been through some
of these horrific experiences, many of them wanted
to be able to talk about it for some good to come out of it
so we spent a lot of time and a lot of energy reaching out
and there's been some great reporting, actually.
T. Chrisitian Miller, who writes for the L.A. Times,
done some great stories and he has
a brilliant book out called "Blood Money".
James Glanz I think it is who writes for the New York Times
so there's been a few reporters that I'm aware of
who've done really good work on this,
but it's one of those issues that needs the dots connected
so that you don't just read an individual story
about one contract for Halliburton,
where they overcharge the government,
but you look at the pattern, and you understand the causes,
you understand it's a cost-plus contract,
and you understand that they give millions of dollars
to political candidates each year.
They spend millions of dollars on lobbyists
and so the dots start to connect.
And we hear this, we've heard it
throughout time, also, not just in war profiteering,
but NASA, where you pay $2,000 for a toilet seat,
but we think, well that's high-tech, I mean,
gravity's a little different up there.
Okay, we can bite that one, but $45 for Coke.
Well a six-pack of Coke.
Okay, yeah, six-pack, excuse me. (laughs)
I hate to think of what it had
Not for single Coke.
been otherwise, it'd been a few hundred dollars.
How has this been received with
the media at large, stirring this up.
By the way, congratulations for stirring it up.
Thank you.
How has the media been receiving it?
Have you been getting much media?
We have actually, it's been...
The film doesn't take a political position
in a sense of political party
or whether your even against or in favor of the war.
There are Republicans in the film.
There are Conservatives in the film by design,
and while the primary media is never
looking to focus on the serious issues for the most part.
That's no fault of the journalist.
The system is there to maximize dollars
and, therefore, the pressure on the news
to do somebody having a baby, rather than
some of the major issues of the day,
but having said that, ABC National News
did a two-minute piece on the film
and profiteering last week.
This week I'll be doing many of the cable shows,
The Washington Post, Chicago Tribune,
and other papers have done pretty major pieces
so I think we have an opportunity
to do what we wanna do with the film,
which is get people talking, get a debate going,
and because the films are distributed alternatively,
every time there's a screening,
there's a discussion afterwards about what to do.
That's a big difference than going to the movie theater,
which I love, and we're also in the movie theaters,
but what happens after the move theater,
your primary concern is getting rid of
the plastic cup that you drank your Diet Coke from.
Here, the primary concern is what are you gonna do?
Are you gonna write a letter?
Are you gonna make a phone call?
Are you gonna go sit-in at an office?
Are you gonna join Amnesty International?
What is the action you will take?
We're able to do that because the films are distributed
in homes, in churches, in schools,
in union halls, et cetera, et cetera.
And this is really a battle against
corporatocracy, really influencing our decisions in D.C.,
and the allocation of these funds,
and for that matter, why we're there at all.
We don't actually go into why we're there.
Some people will make the interpretation
that this is an aspect of going into Iraq.
Mm-hm.
What I tried to do was stay with
absolutely what I could prove factually
and what I could prove factually is
Halliburton gives millions of dollars,
Halliburton votes, any kind of vote to restrict Halliburton
doesn't have a chance in hell,
and we have concrete evidence of their profiteering.
Right, and you did this
and we talked about this in our last interview,
which is so clever, which is to stay away
from Hollywood corporatocracy in essence.
You go to the people directly and you have,
I assume, had some good success
with people really coming on board
with the donations and supporting this.
Is this how it's gotten made?
Yes, in this particular case, we weren't able
to raise the money so we went out to people
who bought the films and we had,
cause we had about a week-and-a-half,
we had three-thousand twenty, thirty people
who contributed $25 and $50 each,
which allowed the film to happen
and it was quite astounding and we actually had a screening.
Our first screening of the film was in Los Angeles
and Santa Monica for hundreds of the people
who had made this $25 and $50 contribution.
It is in theaters, right?
It's in some major cities.
It has shown in--
So it's in New York.
And what are you planning
on doing for theater distribution.
Do you expect wide distribution or are you really
going to the people more to do the home presentations,
libraries, rec halls, et cetera?
We will have very wide distributions, like Walmart
we had 7,000 screenings, but they were in homes,
and churches, and schools, and we'll
similarly have quite wide distribution of events,
but again, I want alternative distribution
because I want a discussion after every screening,
and rather than, just walking out of the movie theater.
Right, so what do you have to say
to people watching this as to how they can become
involved over the next few months or so, ideally,
over the next month-and-a-half, before the election?
We made it pretty simple and proactive,
which is you go to iraqforsale.org,
order a copy of the movie, look at the movie,
and then you say, "What am I gonna do?".
"I can join an organization, I can write a letter,
"I can call my Congressman, or I can do a screening."
The beauty of the films, content aside, is it gives every
one of us an opportunity to be active in a Democracy.
It gives us an opportunity to do something other than
complain that we don't like the way things are going.
It gives us an opportunity to go to our website
and list the screening, and you can make it private,
or you can open it up, and you can have friends,
and colleagues, and schoolmates,
and people from work sign-up.
You could have strangers you don't know.
We've had amazing experiences with people
in the neighborhood so we list it by zip code.
You go on, you put your zip in, and you can find out what--
Yeah, I like that.
screenings are near you.
It's truly a creation of the internet technology,
but it allows everybody to do something.
The only area that I have zero patience
is for people, who say, "Oh, everything's
"so terrible, there's nothing I can do."
That's nonsense.
There are things you can do, and the film is a tool.
It's only successful if you see it and do something.
It's a complete failure if you see it and don't do anything.
Very true.
If you don't mind my going into (laughs)
one of your experiences with the media,
I saw you on Steven Colbert. (both laugh)
You appealed to your support base as to,
"Holy cow, I'm going up with this guy.
"What should I do, Any suggestions?"
I think I even wrote a suggestion.
I'm sure you got thousands of them.
How was it going with Steven Colbert?
He's so off-the-wall. (both laugh)
I'm a huge fan of the program.
I'm a huge fan of him.
I think he's just brilliant and it's challenging because
if your going against the true
right-wingers, you know what to do.
You yell, you scream, you fight, you call each other names,
but you know, he's doing this brilliant thing where
he's sort of a double-agent--
Like a faux right-winger. (laughs)
Yeah, and so it was a challenge,
but it was a good challenge and he's so smart, and so quick,
and so funny.
Isn't he clever?
Yeah.
I thought you held your own very well.
Any plans of going a round with him again on this one?
(laughs) Probably, it's took soon from their point of view
because they like to have a year
before they bring guests back.
(laughs) So you wanna tease us
a little bit if you feel free to of what's coming up next?
I think you were working on this
last time we saw you with the Walmart movie.
This has pretty much taken the
last living breath out of all of us.
We need to finish it.
We have a month-and-a-half of hard work.
I'm touring all next week, going city to city to city
and we have work of getting it out.
Then we will stop and see where we are,
deal with the challenges of fundraising,
and look to the Spring to see what our resources are.
There's no lack of possibilities and no lack of subjects.
I actually would like to put some time and energy
into doing short pieces, rapid-response videos.
What does that mean, rapid-response videos?
The film takes a year, year-and-a-half even,
and that's fast, but I wanna, if I can raise some funds
and if I can get groups behind us,
I want a little guerrilla unit that would,
you know, something comes up in the news,
in 24 hours, you create a video.
Fabulous.
And you push it back out there
and we're in discussions and I'm hopeful.
You have the vehicle with the internet
and streaming becoming as simple as it is for everybody now.
Fabulous, well thank you so much for taking the time.
Pleasure.
I know you're a
very busy, once again, and we'll see you next time
after you get your guerrilla warfare going.
Okay. (both laugh)
Thank you.
You can support the spread of this information
by clicking on the link to "Iraq for Sale" below
and become part of the community airings.
You might also be interested in buying a DVD for yourself.
Meanwhile, to see what he had to say regarding
the mega-store takeover of American consumerism,
watch our previous interview with Robert
on his film titled "Walmart: The High Cost of Cheap Goods".
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(rhythmic music)